# Describe what a sequence is and what they are used for. #

## SQL Book: Create and View Tables ##

The `serial` data type is used to create identifier columns for a PostgreSQL
database. These identifiers are integers, auto-incrementing and cannot contain a
`NULL` value.

Note: it is unusual, but simply specifying a data type of `serial` will add a
`NOT NULL` constraint to the column (in much the same fashion that the sequence
created by `serial` is automatically used for the `DEFAULT` value). Remember,
`serial` is a Postgres convenience and a 'pseudo-data type'; it does more than
an ordinary data type.

## 2:11 Using Keys ##

A **surrogate key** is a value that is created solely for the purpose of
identifying a row of data in a database table. Because it is created
specifically for that purpose, it can avoid many of the problems associated with
natural keys.

Perhaps the most common surrogate key in use today is an auto-incrementing
integer. This is a value that is added to each row in a table as it is created.
With each row, this value increases in order to remain unique in each row.

An easy way to create an auto-incrementing integer for a surrogate key column is
to use the `serial` data type, which is a PostgreSQL convenience, or shorthand,
for a column definition that is much longer. So that
```sql
CREATE TABLE colors (id serial, name text);
```
is shorthand for
```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE colors_id_seq;
CREATE TABLE colors(
  id integer NOT NULL DEFAULT NEXTVAL('colors_id_seq'),
  name text
);
```
N.B. We have to pass the sequence name to `nextval()` as a string.

A **sequence** is a special kind of PostgreSQL relation that generates a
sequence of numbers.
A sequence will remember the last number it generated, so it will generate
numbers in a predetermined sequence automatically.

The sequence's value is used as the `id` column's default value. The next value
of a sequence is accessed using `nextval`, and can be done in any SQL statement.
Once a number is returned by `nextval` for a standard sequence, it will not be
returned again, regardless of whether the value was stored in a row or not.

In short, a sequence is a PostgreSQL relation that generates a predetermined
sequence of numbers, and they are primarily used for a non-repeating
auto-incrementing integer for use as a surrogate key to uniquely identify rows.

## Sequences and auto-incrementing integers ##

The main thing to emphasize is that we need a surrogate key to uniquely identify
rows of data (for CRUD operations and for JOINs) because natural keys are so
often problematic, and that the most common type of value to use for a surrogate
key is an auto-incrementing integer. Different RDBMSs use different syntaxes for
achieving this, but PostgreSQL uses sequences, historically via the `serial`
pseudo-type, which stands in for the more verbose syntax described above.

The more verbose syntax above makes it clear that `serial` creates a `SEQUENCE`
object, and we use the numbers that this sequence object generates by passing
the name of the sequence to the `nextval` function. This call to `nextval` can
be specified as the default value of our surrogate key column, which we also
place a `PRIMARY KEY` constraint on, in order to produce an auto-incrementing
integer value that is unique for each row.

Other RDBMSs use other approaches, both in terms of syntax and implementation.
Some use sequences to achieve an auto-incrementing integer column, and some do
not.

For various technical reasons, `serial` and the verbose syntax it stands in for
are no longer recommended as of PostgreSQL v10; they have been replaced by a
syntax that conforms to modern SQL standards, whereby the `serial` pseudo-type
is replaced by the plain `integer` type followed by the syntactic construction
`GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY`.

This means that
```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id serial PRIMARY KEY,
  name text
);
```
becomes
```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id integer GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
  name text
);
```

Note that `GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY` automatically imposes a `NOT NULL`
constraint, but it does not impose a `UNIQUE` constraint. Of course, if we make
the column `PRIMARY KEY`, that will ensure both data constraints are applied.

This new standardized syntax has updated semantics that properly encapsulate
aspects of the implementation that had previously been exposed, as well as being
portable across any RDBMSs that conform the SQL standard syntax. Previously, the
different RDBMSs had been notoriously inconsistent in their syntax for
auto-incrementing integer columns, making code far less portable.
